Create Blog “use-redfish-and-ipv6-to-find-lost-servers” (#2787)
hpe-dev-incubator/hpe-dev-portal: content/blog/use-redfish-and-ipv6-to-find-lost-servers.md

> TIP:<br>
> If you know that the Link Layer Discovery Protocol (<a href="https://standards.ieee.org/standard/802_1AB-2005.html" target="_blank">LLDP</a>) is enabled in lost iLOs (<a href="https://servermanagementportal.ext.hpe.com/docs/redfishservices/ilos/ilo6/ilo6_changelog/#schema-updates"
> target="_blank">iLO 6</a> and later) and you have a mean to collect LLDP information, save their `ManagementAddressIPv6` property in a list. It contains their link local address. With this list, the recovery process is shorter.
> The next screenshot shows the content of an LLDP transmit object sent
> over the network by an HPE iLO 6.

![Figure 1: Link local address in LLDP transmit object](/img/fig1-lldp-transmit.png "Figure 1: Link local address in LLDP transmit object")

<figcaption>Figure 1: Link local address in LLDP transmit object</figcaption>

## IPv6 basics

If you are already familiar with IPv6, link local, and multicast pre-defined addresses like `FF02::1%ZoneId`, you can skip this paragraph and go directly to the [Recovery process](#recovery-process) section.

> The basic IPv6 architecture is described in Request For Comments (RFC) <a href="https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4291" target="_blank">4291</a>.

Author: Well...., as per Dale, the rule is: 

The first time an expression (i.e. "Request For Comments") that will be shortened in the rest of the document, it is a good practice to mention its short version with surrounding parenthesis. This is the reason why I placed "(RFC)" just after "Request For Comment". 

I'll stick to to Dale's advice.

$JsonResponse = $response.Content | ConvertFrom-Json
$JsonResponse.IPv4Addresses
Address      AddressOrigin Gateway     SubnetMask
-------      ------------- -------     ----------
192.168.1.47 Static        192.168.1.1 255.255.252.0
```

### Multicast addresses

An important concept in IPv6 is the absence of broadcast addresses. Instead, IPv6 uses multicast addresses. The exhaustive list of the pre-defined multicast addresses is present in <a href="https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4291#section-2.7.1" target="_blank">RFC 4291</a>. Among them is the all nodes `FF02::1` address.

From you brick-saver, when you issue a `ping FF02::1%Index` command, each and every IPv6 interfaces present on the LAN must reply with their link local address.
By doing so, you can build the table of all your IPv6 neighbors. You will find more detail on how to use this table in the second scenario below.

## Recovery process

The recovery process presented in this blog post relies entirely on EUI-64 IPv6 link local addresses, and thus on MAC addresses. If you don't have
the list of the affected iLO MAC addresses, you need to go through the next paragraph.

> If you have that list and your systems are iLO 5 based or later with
> <a href="https://servermanagementportal.ext.hpe.com/docs/redfishservices/ilos/ilo6/ilo6_161/ilo6_network_resourcedefns161/#oemhpeipv6"
> target="_blank">RFC7217</a>
> disabled, you can skip the next paragraph and study the second scenario.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you already have that list and your systems are iLO 5 based or later, with
<a href="https://servermanagementportal.ext.hpe.com/docs/redfishservices/ilos/ilo6/ilo6_161/ilo6_network_resourcedefns161/#oemhpeipv6"
target="_blank">Oem.Hpe.IPv6.RFC7217Enabled</a>
turned off, you can skip the next paragraph and study the second scenario.
```

To avoid "or" confusion.  
Also I'm not able to find reference to this resource in iLO 5 doc. according to your link it says beeing introduced in   iLO6 1.61 .

Author: Granted, there is a confusion here, because RFC 7217 is not implemented in iLO 5 and will never be implemented. I completely rephrased this sentence to avoid this confusion.

on personal computers to make them harder to find. This RFC is not implemented in HPE iLOs.

Then, <a href="https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7217" target="_blank">RFC 7217</a>
proposes a method for generating opaque interface identifiers. This RFC is implemented in
<a href="https://servermanagementportal.ext.hpe.com/docs/redfishservices/ilos/ilo6/ilo6_161/ilo6_network_resourcedefns161/#oemhpeipv6"
target="_blank">modern versions</a> of iLO 6 and later, but disabled by default.

IPv6 is enabled in the HPE iLO OS kernel and cannot be disabled. This is by design. Hence, the configured
management interface (dedicated or shared) autoconfigures as soon as it is physically connected to a network.
By default, the link local autoconfiguration process transforms the MAC address into an
<a href="https://standards.ieee.org/faqs/regauth/" target="_blank">IEEE EUI-64</a> address.
Simply explained, this process consists of stretching the MAC address from 48 bits to 64 bits by inserting `FF:FE` in one place
and inverting the universal/local bit of the MAC address. Refer to Appendix A of
<a href="https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4291" target="_blank">RFC 4291</a> for more detail.

> The following two examples retrieves the EUI-64 link local address of a

Reviewer 2: The following two examples **retrieve...**

     https://ilo-lio365g11-1/redfish/v1/Managers/1/EthernetInterfaces/1 |    \
     jq '{"MACAddress":.MACAddress, "IPv6Address":.IPv6Addresses[].Address, "RFC7217Enabled": .Oem.Hpe.IPv6.RFC7217Enabled}'

{
  "MACAddress": "5C:ED:8C:01:0D:7C",
  "IPv6Address": "FE80::5EED:8CFF:FE01:D7C",
  "RFC7217Enabled": false
}
```

The following example retrieves the same properties as in the previous
example, but against an iLO with the `RFC7217Enabled` property set
to `true`. In this example, the link local address does not contain
the `FF:FE` string and the identifier has no similarities with the MAC address.

```shell
ilorest login ilo-lio365g11-2 -u <username> -p password
ilorest get IPv6Addresses/Address MACAddress Oem/Hpe/IPv6/RFC7217Enabled  \
        --select EthernetInterface.                                       \
        --filter Name="Manager Dedicated*" --json
{
  "IPv6Addresses": [
    {
      "Address": "FE80::8751:5A51:F30F:F676"
    }
  ],
  "MACAddress": "5C:ED:8C:01:0E:BE",
  "Oem": {
    "Hpe": {
      "IPv6": {
        "RFC7217Enabled": true
      }
    }
  }
}
ilorest logout
```

### How to completely disable IPv6 in iLO?

> This question is a bit aside of the core subject of this blog post, but, as it is

Reviewer 2: rephrase "I'll take my chance" to "I thought I would answer it here."

a recurrent question and there is enough information to answer it clearly in this blog post, I'll take my chance.

The answer is: *Disable DHCPv6 as well as SLAAC* as shown in Figure 1 below.
I can hear you reply that you did that, but you still can see the link local address
like in Figure 1 below. This is expected.

> As said previously, SLAAC is always enabled in the iLO OS kernel, and cannot be disabled.

Reviewer 2: Change "As said previously" to "As **stated** previously"

As a consequence, the IPv6 link local SLAAC address is always present in both the iLO Graphical User Interface (GUI),
and Redfish responses. However, you will not find any SLAAC addresses resulting of an
<a href="https://radvd.litech.org/" target="_blank">advertised prefix</a> or a DHCP server.

![Figure 2: SLAAC link local visible when SLAAC disabled](/img/fig2-ipv6-link-local.png "Figure 2: SLAAC link local visible when SLAAC disabled")

<figcaption>Figure 2: SLAAC link local visible when SLAAC disabled</figcaption>

### How to compute an EUI-64 link local

> The easiest method to compute the EUI-64 link local address using a MAC address,

Reviewer 2: Take out the comma just after "address" and again, take out the comma after "Linux systems"

is with the `ipv6calc`
<a href="https://www.deepspace6.net/projects/ipv6calc.html"
target="_blank">utility</a>. Use your favorite package installer on modern Linux
systems, or compile the sources on Microsoft Windows to make it work.

The following block of code transforms a MAC address into its EUI-64 equivalent.
By prepending `FE80::` to the output of the `ipv6calc` command,
you will get the complete SLAAC link-local address (second command of next example).

```shell
ipv6calc --quiet --in mac 94:18:82:71:A0:7A --out eui64
9618:82ff:fe71:a07a

echo -n "fe80::" ; ipv6calc --quiet --in mac 94:18:82:71:A0:7A --out eui64
fe80::9618:82ff:fe71:a07a
```

### Zone indexes

> From your brick-saver, when you will want to initiate a communication with a link-local IPv6 address,

Reviewer 2: Take out the word "will" so it reads "when you want to initiate"

$JsonResponse = $response.Content | ConvertFrom-Json
$JsonResponse.IPv4Addresses
Address      AddressOrigin Gateway     SubnetMask
-------      ------------- -------     ----------
192.168.1.47 Static        192.168.1.1 255.255.252.0
```

### Multicast addresses

An important concept in IPv6 is the absence of broadcast addresses. Instead, IPv6 uses multicast addresses. The exhaustive list of the pre-defined multicast addresses is present in <a href="https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4291#section-2.7.1" target="_blank">RFC 4291</a>. Among them is the all nodes `FF02::1` address.

From you brick-saver, when you issue a `ping FF02::1%Index` command, each and every IPv6 interfaces present on the LAN must reply with their link local address.
By doing so, you can build the table of all your IPv6 neighbors. You will find more detail on how to use this table in the second scenario below.

## Recovery process

The recovery process presented in this blog post relies entirely on EUI-64 IPv6 link local addresses, and thus on MAC addresses. If you don't have
the list of the affected iLO MAC addresses, you need to go through the next paragraph.

> In case you have that list and your systems are iLO 5 based or later with

Reviewer 2: Change "In case you have that list" to "If you have that list"

<a href="https://servermanagementportal.ext.hpe.com/docs/redfishservices/ilos/ilo6/ilo6_161/ilo6_network_resourcedefns161/#oemhpeipv6"
target="_blank">RFC7217</a>
disabled, you can skip the next paragraph and study the second scenario.

### MAC address discovery

The lost iLOs MAC address discovery is performed with the IPv6 neighbor table maintained in your brick-saver.

> The overall method is the following:

Reviewer 2: Add in the word "used"... "The overall method used is the following:"

> 1. Make sure affected servers are powered on. This step can only be done by a human being present in the computer room. Then hide their iLO port from the network by physically disconnecting the network cable. You could unplug the server power cables to achieve this goal, but this would hide also OS interfaces connected to the management LAN. Those interfaces would then re-appear in step 5 below, although they are not iLO interfaces and alter the discovered MAC address list.

Reviewer 2: In the third sentence, put a comma after "Then" so it reads "Then, hide their..."
In the fourth sentence, modify it so it reads "... but this would **also hide** OS interfaces..." [placement of the word "also"]

```

### Configuration recovery

The last step to completely recover from the lost iLOs is to re-configure their
network parameters. From the brick-saver, the following example
shows a generic PATCH request and its associated payload
to configure a minimal static IPv4 configuration of a lost iLO.

With the previous examples, it should be easy for you to adapt it
for iLOrest, cURL or PowerShell. Other examples for configuring iLO network
parameters are presented in the
<a href="https://servermanagementportal.ext.hpe.com/docs/redfishclients/ilorest-userguide/examplecommandsscripts/#configure-ilo-ip-addresses"
target="_blank">documentation</a>.

```text
PATCH request URL
https://[FE80::9618:82FF:FE71:A07B%eno1]/redfish/v1/Managers/1/EthernetInterfaces/1/

Payload:

{
    "DHCPv4": {
        "DHCPEnabled": false,
        "UseDNSServers": false,
        "UseDomainName": false,
        "UseGateway": false,
        "UseNTPServers": false,
        "UseStaticRoutes": false
    },
    "IPv4StaticAddresses": [
        {
            "Address": "192.168.1.44",
            "Gateway": "192.168.1.1",
            "SubnetMask": "255.255.252.0"
        }
    ]
}
```

## Conclusion

> This article presented a method with simple PowerShell and Linux commands

Reviewer 2: Take out the word "back" so it reads "to find lost servers"

to find back lost servers after a
move from one network to another without any configuration preparation prior to the move.

> As this method uses IPv6, many of its concepts have been introduced,

Reviewer 2: Should it say "including the its autoconfiguration process" or should it say "including its autoconfiguration process"?

In the second sentence, it's more proper to say "If you would like more detail..."

In this post, it is also assumed that it is not possible to change the brick-saver network configuration to match the LAN settings of lost iLOs. If that is not the case, this article is not relevant.

When the Media Access Control (MAC) address of impacted iLOs is unknown, an operator must be able to access and manipulate iLO cables and power buttons of the affected servers.

Then, in order to re-program the network configuration of lost iLOs, you must have the credentials of a privileged user in each of them. This user could be the factory administrator account and associated password mentioned on the "toe-tag" present on the front panel of HPE servers.

> TIP:<br>
> If you know that the Link Layer Discovery Protocol (<a href="https://standards.ieee.org/standard/802_1AB-2005.html" target="_blank">LLDP</a>) is enabled in lost iLOs (<a href="https://servermanagementportal.ext.hpe.com/docs/redfishservices/ilos/ilo6/ilo6_changelog/#schema-updates"

> > target="_blank">iLO 6</a>

Reviewer 3: Add a space between "iLO 6" "and later".

   and extract their `RedfishVersion` property. If the list contains a non-redfish conformant address,
   the following `cURL/jq` commands will report an error.

   ```shell
   for ll in $LL_LIST ; do
     curl --proxy \* --insecure --silent https://[${ll}%eno1]/redfish/v1 | \
     jq '.RedfishVersion'
   done
   "1.20.0"
   parse error: Invalid numeric literal at line 1, column 10
   "1.13.0"
   ```

If your brick-saver is running Microsoft Windows, here are some hints
to perform the above procedure.

```shell
# Start a privileged PowerShell session and retrieve Zone indexes
Get-NetAdapter | Where-Object { $_.Status -eq 'Up' } | Select-Object Name, InterfaceIndex

# Show neighbors:
netsh interface ipv6 show neighbors interface=22 > File.txt

# Delete neighbor table
netsh interface ipv6 delete neighbors interface=22

# Populate neighbor table
Test-Connection -Count 1 -ComputerName ff02::1%22

Compare-Object (Get-Content File1.txt) (Get-Content File2.txt) |  Where-Object { $_.SideIndicator -eq '=>' } | Select-Object InputObject
```

### Known MAC addresses and RFC 7217 disabled

If you have the list of lost MAC addresses and you know that

> <a href="https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7217" target="_blank">RFC 7217</a>

Reviewer 3: add a space after "RFC 7217".

target="_blank">documentation</a>.

```text
PATCH request URL
https://[FE80::9618:82FF:FE71:A07B%eno1]/redfish/v1/Managers/1/EthernetInterfaces/1/

Payload:

{
    "DHCPv4": {
        "DHCPEnabled": false,
        "UseDNSServers": false,
        "UseDomainName": false,
        "UseGateway": false,
        "UseNTPServers": false,
        "UseStaticRoutes": false
    },
    "IPv4StaticAddresses": [
        {
            "Address": "192.168.1.44",
            "Gateway": "192.168.1.1",
            "SubnetMask": "255.255.252.0"
        }
    ]
}
```

## Conclusion

This article presented a method with simple PowerShell and Linux commands
to find lost servers after a
move from one network to another without any configuration preparation prior to the move.

As this method uses IPv6, many of its concepts have been introduced,
including its autoconfiguration process. If you like more detail on autoconfiguration,
I would suggest to read the corresponding section I wrote some time ago in the
<a href="https://ipj.dreamhosters.com/wp-content/uploads/issues/2004/ipj07-2.pdf"
target="_blank">Internet Protocol Journal</a>.

And don't forget to check out some of my other

> <a href="https://developer.hpe.com/search/?term=donze" target="_blank">blog posts</a>

Reviewer 3: add a space after "blog posts".

> on the HPE Developer portal to learn more about Redfish tips and tricks.

Reviewer 3: ...on the HPE Developer Community portal to learn more...
